Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
END-TO-END ADVERSARIAL TEXT-TO-SPEECH
Jeff Donahue∗, Sander Dieleman∗, Mikołaj Bi´nkowski, Erich Elsen, Karen Simonyan∗
DeepMind
{jeffdonahue,sedielem,binek,eriche,simonyan}@google.com
ABSTRACT
Modern text-to-speech synthesis pipelines typically involve multiple processing
stages, each of which is designed or learnt independently from the rest. In this
work, we take on the challenging task of learning to synthesise speech from
normalised text or phonemes in an end-to-end manner, resulting in models which
operate directly on character or phoneme input sequences and produce raw speech
audio outputs. Our proposed generator is feed-forward and thus efﬁcient for both
training and inference, using a differentiable alignment scheme based on token
length prediction. It learns to produce high ﬁdelity audio through a combination
of adversarial feedback and prediction losses constraining the generated audio to
roughly match the ground truth in terms of its total duration and mel-spectrogram.
To allow the model to capture temporal variation in the generated audio, we employ
soft dynamic time warping in the spectrogram-based prediction loss. The resulting
model achieves a mean opinion score exceeding 4 on a 5 point scale, which
is comparable to the state-of-the-art models relying on multi-stage training and
additional supervision.1
1
INTRODUCTION
A text-to-speech (TTS) system processes natural language text inputs to produce synthetic human-like
speech outputs. Typical TTS pipelines consist of a number of stages trained or designed independently
– e.g. text normalisation, aligned linguistic featurisation, mel-spectrogram synthesis, and raw audio
waveform synthesis (Taylor, 2009). Although these pipelines have proven capable of realistic and
high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis and enjoy wide real-world use today, these modular approaches come
with a number of drawbacks. They often require supervision at each stage, in some cases necessitating
expensive “ground truth” annotations to guide the outputs of each stage, and sequential training of the
stages. Further, they are unable to reap the full potential rewards of data-driven “end-to-end" learning
widely observed in a number of prediction and synthesis task domains across machine learning.
In this work, we aim to simplify the TTS pipeline and take on the challenging task of synthesising
speech from text or phonemes in an end-to-end manner. We propose EATS – End-to-end Adversarial
Text-to-Speech – generative models for TTS trained adversarially (Goodfellow et al., 2014) that
operate on either pure text or raw (temporally unaligned) phoneme input sequences, and produce raw
speech waveforms as output. These models eliminate the typical intermediate bottlenecks present
in most state-of-the-art TTS engines by maintaining learnt intermediate feature representations
throughout the network.
Our speech synthesis models are composed of two high-level submodules, detailed in Section 2. An
aligner processes the raw input sequence and produces relatively low-frequency (200 Hz) aligned
features in its own learnt, abstract feature space. The features output by the aligner may be thought
of as taking the place of the earlier stages of typical TTS pipelines – e.g., temporally aligned mel-
spectrograms or linguistic features. These features are then input to the decoder which upsamples the
features from the aligner by 1D convolutions to produce 24 kHz audio waveforms.
By carefully designing the aligner and guiding training by a combination of adversarial feedback and
domain-speciﬁc loss functions, we demonstrate that a TTS system can be learnt nearly end-to-end,
∗Equal contribution. First author determined by coin toss.
1
Listen
to
our
model
reading
this
abstract
at:
https://deepmind.com/research/
publications/End-to-End-Adversarial-Text-to-Speech
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
resulting in high-ﬁdelity natural-sounding speech approaching the state-of-the-art TTS systems. Our
main contributions include:
• A fully differentiable and efﬁcient feed-forward aligner architecture that predicts the duration of
each input token and produces an audio-aligned representation.
• The use of ﬂexible dynamic time warping-based prediction losses to enforce alignment with input
conditioning while allowing the model to capture the variability of timing in human speech.
• An overall system achieving a mean opinion score of 4.083, approaching the state of the art from
models trained using richer supervisory signals.
2
METHOD
Our goal is to learn a neural network (the generator) which maps an input sequence of characters
or phonemes to raw audio at 24 kHz. Beyond the vastly different lengths of the input and output
signals, this task is also challenging because the input and output are not aligned, i.e. it is not
known beforehand which output tokens each input token will correspond to. To address these
challenges, we divide the generator into two blocks: (i) the aligner, which maps the unaligned input
sequence to a representation which is aligned with the output, but has a lower sample rate of 200 Hz;
and (ii) the decoder, which upsamples the aligner’s output to the full audio frequency. The entire
generator architecture is differentiable, and is trained end to end. Importantly, it is also a feed-forward
convolutional network, which makes it well-suited for applications where fast batched inference
is important: our EATS implementation generates speech at a speed of 200× realtime on a single
NVIDIA V100 GPU (see Appendix A and Table 3 for details). It is illustrated in Figure 1.
The generator is inspired by GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020), a text-to-speech generative ad-
versarial network operating on aligned linguistic features. We employ the GAN-TTS generator
as the decoder in our model, but instead of upsampling pre-computed linguistic features, its input
comes from the aligner block. We make it speaker-conditional by feeding in a speaker embedding
s alongside the latent vector z, to enable training on a larger dataset with recordings from multiple
speakers. We also adopt the multiple random window discriminators (RWDs) from GAN-TTS, which
have been proven effective for adversarial raw waveform modelling, and we preprocess real audio
input by applying a simple µ-law transform. Hence, the generator is trained to produce audio in the
µ-law domain and we apply the inverse transformation to its outputs when sampling.
The loss function we use to train the generator is as follows:
LG = LG,adv + λpred · L′′
pred + λlength · Llength,
(1)
where LG,adv is the adversarial loss, linear in the discriminators’ outputs, paired with the hinge
loss (Lim & Ye, 2017; Tran et al., 2017) used as the discriminators’ objective, as used in GAN-
TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020). The use of an adversarial (Goodfellow et al., 2014) loss is an advantage
of our approach, as this setup allows for efﬁcient feed-forward training and inference, and such
losses tend to be mode-seeking in practice, a useful behaviour in a strongly conditioned setting where
realism is an important design goal, as in the case of text-to-speech. In the remainder of this section,
we describe the aligner network and the auxiliary prediction (L′′
pred) and length (Llength) losses in
detail, and recap the components which were adopted from GAN-TTS.
2.1
ALIGNER
Given a token sequence x = (x1, . . . , xN) of length N, we ﬁrst compute token representations
h = f(x, z, s), where f is a stack of dilated convolutions (van den Oord et al., 2016) interspersed
with batch normalisation (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) and ReLU activations. The latents z and speaker
embedding s modulate the scale and shift parameters of the batch normalisation layers (Dumoulin
et al., 2017; De Vries et al., 2017). We then predict the length for each input token individually:
ln = g(hn, z, s), where g is an MLP. We use a ReLU nonlinearity at the output to ensure that the
predicted lengths are non-negative. We can then ﬁnd the predicted token end positions as a cumulative
sum of the token lengths: en = Pn
m=1 lm, and the token centre positions as cn = en −1
2ln. Based
on these predicted positions, we can interpolate the token representations into an audio-aligned
representation at 200 Hz, a = (a1, . . . , aS), where S = ⌈eN⌉is the total number of output time steps.
To compute at, we obtain interpolation weights for the token representations hn using a softmax over
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
the squared distance between t and cn, scaled by a temperature parameter σ2, which we set to 10.0
(i.e. a Gaussian kernel):
wn
t =
exp
 −σ−2(t −cn)2
PN
m=1 exp
 −σ−2(t −cm)2.
(2)
Using these weights, we can then compute at = PN
n=1 wn
t hn, which amounts to non-uniform
interpolation. By predicting token lengths and obtaining positions using cumulative summation,
instead of predicting positions directly, we implicitly enforce monotonicity of the alignment. Note
that tokens which have a non-monotonic effect on prosody, such as punctuation, can still affect the
entire utterance thanks to the stack of dilated convolutions f, whose receptive ﬁeld is large enough to
allow for propagation of information across the entire token sequence. The convolutions also ensure
generalisation across different sequence lengths. Appendix B includes pseudocode for the aligner.
2.2
WINDOWED GENERATOR TRAINING
Phonemizer
 Dilated Conv Block ch = 256      
x10
BN, ReLU, Conv ch = 256
BN, ReLU, Conv ch = 1
t
k
s
_
_ ɒ
t
_ ð
n
_
ə
t .
æ
C a t    s a t    o n    t h e   m a t .  
m
c2 c3
c1
cN
cN-2
æ
æ
cn = Σm ≤ n lm - ln / 2
logits grid
xnt = - 𝜎 -2(cn - η - t)2
𝜎2 - temp.
η - offset
Softmax along the horizontal (n) axis
Transpose
BN, ReLU
Speaker ID
Linear
Linear
Linear
Aligner
l2 l3
l1
lN-1 lN
lN-2
token lengths
cn < η
cn > η + T
Decoder
GAN-TTS 
Generator
η
cN-1
token centres
t
n
Embed
Conv ch = 256
z
Concat
Embed Concat
Figure 1: A diagram of the generator, including the
monotonic interpolation-based aligner. z and ch
denote the latent Gaussian vector and the number
of output channels, respectively. During training,
audio windows have a ﬁxed length of 2 seconds
and are generated from the conditioning text using
random offsets η and predicted phoneme lengths;
the shaded areas in the logits grid and waveform
are not synthesised. For inference (sampling), we
set η = 0. In the No Phonemes ablation, the phone-
mizer is skipped and the character sequence is fed
directly into the aligner.
Training examples vary widely in length, from
about 1 to 20 seconds. We cannot pad all se-
quences to a maximal length during training, as
this would be wasteful and prohibitively expen-
sive: 20 seconds of audio at 24 kHz correspond
to 480,000 timesteps, which results in high mem-
ory requirements. Instead, we randomly extract
a 2 second window from each example, which
we will refer to as a training window, by uni-
formly sampling a random offset η. The aligner
produces a 200 Hz audio-aligned representation
for this window, which is then fed to the de-
coder (see Figure 1). Note that we only need
to compute at for time steps t that fall within
the sampled window, but we do have to com-
pute the predicted token lengths ln for the entire
input sequence. During evaluation, we simply
produce the audio-aligned representation for the
full utterance and run the decoder on it, which
is possible because it is fully convolutional.
2.3
ADVERSARIAL DISCRIMINATORS
Random window discriminators.
We use an
ensemble of random window discriminators
(RWDs) adopted from GAN-TTS. Each RWD
operates on audio fragments of different lengths,
randomly sampled from the training window.
We use ﬁve RWDs with window sizes 240, 480,
960, 1920 and 3600. This enables each RWD to
operate at a different resolution. Note that 3600
samples at 24 kHz corresponds to 150 ms of
audio, so all RWDs operate on short timescales.
All RWDs in our model are unconditional with
respect to text: they cannot access the text se-
quence or the aligner output. (GAN-TTS uses
10 RWDs, including 5 conditioned on linguistic
features which we omit.) They are, however,
conditioned on the speaker, via projection embedding (Miyato & Koyama, 2018).
Spectrogram discriminator.
We use an additional discriminator which operates on the full training
window in the spectrogram domain. We extract log-scaled mel-spectrograms from the audio signals
and use the BigGAN-deep architecture (Brock et al., 2018), essentially treating the spectrograms as
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
images. The spectrogram discriminator also uses speaker identity through projection embedding.
Details on the spectrogram discriminator architecture are included in Appendix C.
2.4
SPECTROGRAM PREDICTION LOSS
In preliminary experiments, we discovered that adversarial feedback is insufﬁcient to learn alignment.
At the start of training, the aligner does not produce an accurate alignment, so the information in the
input tokens is incorrectly temporally distributed. This encourages the decoder to ignore the aligner
output. The unconditional discriminators provide no useful learning signal to correct this. If we want
to use conditional discriminators instead, we face a different problem: we do not have aligned ground
truth. Conditional discriminators also need an aligner module, which cannot function correctly at the
start of training, effectively turning them into unconditional discriminators. Although it should be
possible in theory to train the discriminators’ aligner modules adversarially, we ﬁnd that this does not
work in practice, and training gets stuck.
Instead, we propose to guide learning by using an explicit prediction loss in the spectrogram domain:
we minimise the L1 loss between the log-scaled mel-spectrograms of the generator output, and the
corresponding ground truth training window. This helps training to take off, and renders conditional
discriminators unnecessary, simplifying the model. Let Sgen be the spectrogram of the generated
audio, Sgt the spectrogram of the corresponding ground truth, and S[t, f] the log-scaled magnitude
at time step t and mel-frequency bin f. Then the prediction loss is:
Lpred = 1
F
PT
t=1
PF
f=1 |Sgen[t, f] −Sgt[t, f]|.
(3)
T and F are the total number of time steps and mel-frequency bins respectively. Computing the
prediction loss in the spectrogram domain, rather than the time domain, has the advantage of
increased invariance to phase differences between the generated and ground truth signals, which are
not perceptually salient. Seeing as the spectrogram extraction operation has several hyperparameters
and its implementation is not standardised, we provide the code we used for this in Appendix D. We
applied a small amount of jitter (by up to ±60 samples at 24 kHz) to the ground truth waveform
before computing Sgt, which helped to reduce artifacts in the generated audio.
The inability to learn alignment from adversarial feedback alone is worth expanding on: likelihood-
based autoregressive models have no issues learning alignment, because they are able to beneﬁt
from teacher forcing (Williams & Zipser, 1989) during training: the model is trained to perform
next step prediction on each sequence step, given the preceding ground truth, and it is expected to
infer alignment only one step at a time. This is not compatible with feed-forward adversarial models
however, so the prediction loss is necessary to bootstrap alignment learning for our model.
Note that although we make use of mel-spectrograms for training in Lpred (and to compute the inputs
for the spectrogram discriminator, Section 2.3), the generator itself does not produce spectrograms
as part of the generation process. Rather, its outputs are raw waveforms, and we convert these
waveforms to spectrograms only for training (backpropagating gradients through the waveform to
mel-spectrogram conversion operation).
2.5
DYNAMIC TIME WARPING
The spectrogram prediction loss incorrectly assumes that token lengths are deterministic. We can
relax the requirement that the generated and ground truth spectrograms are exactly aligned, by
incorporating dynamic time warping (DTW) (Sakoe, 1971; Sakoe & Chiba, 1978). We calculate the
prediction loss by iteratively ﬁnding a minimal-cost alignment path p between the generated and target
spectrograms, Sgen and Sgt. We start at the ﬁrst time step in both spectrograms: pgen,1 = pgt,1 = 1.
At each iteration k, we take one of three possible actions:
1. go to the next time step in both Sgen, Sgt: pgen,k+1 = pgen,k + 1, pgt,k+1 = pgt,k + 1;
2. go to the next time step in Sgt only: pgen,k+1 = pgen,k, pgt,k+1 = pgt,k + 1;
3. go to the next time step in Sgen only: pgen,k+1 = pgen,k + 1, pgt,k+1 = pgt,k.
The resulting path is p = ⟨(pgen,1, pgt,1), . . . , (pgen,Kp, pgt,Kp)⟩, where Kp is the length. Each
action is assigned a cost based on the L1 distance between Sgen[pgen,k] and Sgt[pgt,k], and a warp
penalty w which is incurred if we choose not to advance both spectrograms in lockstep (i.e. we are
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
warping the spectrogram by taking action 2 or 3; we use w = 1.0). The warp penalty thus encourages
alignment paths that do not deviate too far from the identity alignment. Let δk be an indicator which
is 1 for iterations where warping occurs, and 0 otherwise. Then the total path cost cp is:
cp = PKp
k=1

w · δk + 1
F
PF
f=1 |Sgen[pgen,k, f] −Sgt[pgt,k, f]|

.
(4)
Kp depends on the degree of warping (T ≤Kp ≤2T −1). The DTW prediction loss is then:
L′
pred = min
p∈P cp,
(5)
where P is the set of all valid paths. p ∈P only when pgen,1 = pgt,1 = 1 and pgen,Kp = pgt,Kp = T,
i.e. the ﬁrst and last timesteps of the spectrograms are aligned. To ﬁnd the minimum, we use dynamic
programming. Figure 2 shows a diagram of an optimal alignment path between two sequences.
Sgen
Sgt
A
A
A
B
B
C
D
D
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
D
E
E
E
Figure 2: Dynamic time warp-
ing between two sequences
ﬁnds a minimal-cost align-
ment path. Positions where
warping occurs are marked
with a border.
DTW is differentiable, but the minimum across all paths makes op-
timisation difﬁcult, because the gradient is propagated only through
the minimal path. We use a soft version of DTW instead (Cuturi &
Blondel, 2017), which replaces the minimum with the soft minimum:
L′′
pred = −τ · log P
p∈P exp
 −cp
τ

,
(6)
where τ = 0.01 is a temperature parameter and the loss scale factor
λpred = 1.0. Note that the minimum operation is recovered by
letting τ →0. The resulting loss is a weighted aggregated cost
across all paths, enabling gradient propagation through all feasible
paths. This creates a trade-off: a higher τ makes optimisation easier,
but the resulting loss less accurately reﬂects the minimal path cost.
Pseudocode for the soft DTW procedure is provided in Appendix E.
By relaxing alignment in the prediction loss, the generator can pro-
duce waveforms that are not exactly aligned, without being heavily
penalised for it. This creates a synergy with the adversarial loss:
instead of working against each other because of the rigidity of the
prediction loss, the losses now cooperate to reward realistic audio
generation with stochastic alignment. Note that the prediction loss
is computed on a training window, and not on full length utterances, so we still assume that the start
and end points of the windows are exactly aligned. While this might be incorrect, it does not seem to
be much of a problem in practice.
2.6
ALIGNER LENGTH LOSS
To ensure that the model produces realistic token length predictions, we add a loss which encourages
the predicted utterance length to be close to the ground truth length. This length is found by summing
all token length predictions. Let L be the the number of time steps in the training utterance at 200 Hz,
ln the predicted length of the nth token, and N the number of tokens, then the length loss is:
Llength = 1
2

L −PN
n=1 ln
2
.
(7)
We use a scale factor λlength = 0.1. Note that we cannot match the predicted lengths ln to the ground
truth lengths individually, because the latter are not available.
2.7
TEXT PRE-PROCESSING
Although our model works well with character input, we ﬁnd that sample quality improves signiﬁ-
cantly using phoneme input instead. This is not too surprising, given the heterogeneous way in which
spellings map to phonemes, particularly in the English language. Many character sequences also
have special pronunciations, such as numbers, dates, units of measurement and website domains, and
a very large training dataset would be required for the model to learn to pronounce these correctly.
Text normalisation (Zhang et al., 2019) can be applied beforehand to spell out these sequences as
they are typically pronounced (e.g., 1976 could become nineteen seventy six), potentially followed by
conversion to phonemes. We use an open source tool, phonemizer (Bernard, 2020), which performs
partial normalisation and phonemisation (see Appendix F). Finally, whether we train on text or
phoneme input sequences, we pre- and post-pad the sequence with a special silence token (for training
and inference), to allow the aligner to account for silence at the beginning and end of each utterance.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
3
RELATED WORK
Speech generation saw signiﬁcant quality improvements once treating it as a generative modelling
problem became the norm (Zen et al., 2009; van den Oord et al., 2016). Likelihood-based approaches
dominate, but generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) have been making
signiﬁcant inroads recently. A common thread through most of the literature is a separation of
the speech generation process into multiple stages: coarse-grained temporally aligned intermediate
representations, such as mel-spectrograms, are used to divide the task into more manageable sub-
problems. Many works focus exclusively on either spectrogram generation or vocoding (generating a
waveform from a spectrogram). Our work is different in this respect, and we will point out which
stages of the generation process are addressed by each model. In Appendix J, Table 6 we compare
these methods in terms of the inputs and outputs to each stage of their pipelines.
Initially, most likelihood-based models for TTS were autoregressive (van den Oord et al., 2016; Mehri
et al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017), which means that there is a sequential dependency between subsequent
time steps of the produced output signal. That makes these models impractical for real-time use,
although this can be addressed with careful engineering (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018; Valin & Skoglund,
2019). More recently, ﬂow-based models (Papamakarios et al., 2019) have been explored as a
feed-forward alternative that enables fast inference (without sequential dependencies). These can
either be trained directly using maximum likelihood (Prenger et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019; Ping et al.,
2019b), or through distillation from an autoregressive model (van den Oord et al., 2018; Ping et al.,
2019a). All of these models produce waveforms conditioned on an intermediate representation: either
spectrograms or “linguistic features”, which contain temporally-aligned high-level information about
the speech signal. Spectrogram-conditioned waveform models are often referred to as vocoders.
A growing body of work has applied GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) variants to speech synthe-
sis (Donahue et al., 2019). An important advantage of adversarial losses for TTS is a focus on
realism over diversity; the latter is less important in this setting. This enables a more efﬁcient use of
capacity compared to models trained with maximum likelihood. MelGAN (Kumar et al., 2019) and
Parallel WaveGAN (Yamamoto et al., 2020) are adversarial vocoders, producing raw waveforms from
mel-spectrograms. Neekhara et al. (2019) predict magnitude spectrograms from mel-spectrograms.
Most directly related to our work is GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020), which produces waveforms
conditioned on aligned linguistic features, and we build upon that work.
Another important line of work covers spectrogram generation from text. Such models rely on a
vocoder to convert the spectrograms into waveforms (for which one of the previously mentioned
models could be used, or a traditional spectrogram inversion technique (Grifﬁn & Lim, 1984)).
Tacotron 1 & 2 (Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018), Deep Voice 2 & 3 (Gibiansky et al., 2017; Ping
et al., 2018), TransformerTTS (Li et al., 2019), Flowtron (Valle et al., 2020), and VoiceLoop (Taigman
et al., 2017) are autoregressive models that generate spectrograms or vocoder features frame by frame.
Guo et al. (2019) suggest using an adversarial loss to reduce exposure bias (Bengio et al., 2015;
Ranzato et al., 2016) in such models. MelNet (Vasquez & Lewis, 2019) is autoregressive over
both time and frequency. ParaNet (Peng et al., 2019) and FastSpeech (Ren et al., 2019) are non-
autoregressive, but they require distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) from an autoregressive model. Recent
ﬂow-based approaches Flow-TTS (Miao et al., 2020) and Glow-TTS (Kim et al., 2020) are feed-
forward without requiring distillation. Most spectrogram generation models require training of a
custom vocoder model on generated spectrograms, because their predictions are imperfect and the
vocoder needs to be able to compensate for this2. Note that some of these works also propose new
vocoder architectures in tandem with spectrogram generation models.
Unlike all of the aforementioned methods, as highlighted in Appendix J, Table 6, our model is a single
feed-forward neural network, trained end-to-end in a single stage, which produces waveforms given
character or phoneme sequences, and learns to align without additional supervision from auxiliary
sources (e.g. temporally aligned linguistic features from an external model) or teacher forcing. This
simpliﬁes the training process considerably. Char2wav (Sotelo et al., 2017) is ﬁnetuned end-to-end
in the same fashion, but requires a pre-training stage with vocoder features used for intermediate
supervision.
Spectrogram prediction losses have been used extensively for feed-forward audio prediction mod-
els (Yamamoto et al., 2019; 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Arık et al., 2018; Engel et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2This also implies that the spectrogram generation model and the vocoder have to be trained sequentially.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
2019; Défossez et al., 2018). We note that the L1 loss we use (along with (Défossez et al., 2018)), is
comparatively simple, as spectrogram losses in the literature tend to have separate terms penalising
magnitudes, log-magnitudes and phase components, each with their own scaling factors, and often
across multiple resolutions. Dynamic time warping on spectrograms is a component of many speech
recognition systems (Sakoe, 1971; Sakoe & Chiba, 1978), and has also been used for evaluation of
TTS systems (Sailor & Patil, 2014; Chevelu et al., 2015). Cuturi & Blondel (2017) proposed the soft
version of DTW we use in this work as a differentiable loss function for time series models. Kim
et al. (2020) propose Monotonic Alignment Search (MAS), which relates to DTW in that both use
dynamic programming to implicitly align sequences for TTS. However, they have different goals:
MAS ﬁnds the optimal alignment between the text and a latent representation, whereas we use
DTW to relax the constraints imposed by our spectrogram prediction loss term. Several mechanisms
have been proposed to exploit monotonicity in tasks that require sequence alignment, including
attention mechanisms (Graves, 2013; Zhang et al., 2018; Vasquez & Lewis, 2019; He et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2017; Chiu & Raffel, 2018), loss functions (Graves et al., 2006; Graves, 2012) and
search-based approaches (Kim et al., 2020). For TTS, incorporating this constraint has been found
to help generalisation to long sequences (Battenberg et al., 2020). We incorporate monotonicity by
using an interpolation mechanism, which is cheap to compute because it is not recurrent (unlike many
monotonic attention mechanisms).
4
EVALUATION
In this section we discuss the setup and results of our empirical evaluation, describing the hyperparam-
eter settings used for training and validating the architectural decisions and loss function components
detailed in Section 2. Our primary metric used to evaluate speech quality is the Mean Opinion Score
(MOS) given by human raters, computed by taking the mean of 1-5 naturalness ratings given across
1000 held-out conditioning sequences. In Appendix I we also report the Fréchet DeepSpeech Distance
(FDSD), proposed by Bi´nkowski et al. (2020) as a speech synthesis quality metric. Appendix A
reports training and evaluation hyperparameters we used for all experiments.
4.1
MULTI-SPEAKER DATASET
We train all models on a private dataset that consists of high-quality recordings of human speech
performed by professional voice actors, and corresponding text. The voice pool consists of 69 female
and male voices of North American English speakers, while the audio clips contain full sentences of
lengths varying from less than 1 to 20 seconds at 24 kHz frequency. Individual voices are unevenly
distributed, accounting for from 15 minutes to over 51 hours of recorded speech, totalling 260.49
hours. At training time, we sample 2 second windows from the individual clips, post-padding those
shorter than 2 seconds with silence. For evaluation, we focus on the single most proliﬁc speaker in
our dataset, with all our main MOS results reported with the model conditioned on that speaker ID,
but also report MOS results for each of the top four speakers using our main multi-speaker model.
4.2
RESULTS
In Table 1 we present quantitative results for our EATS model described in Section 2, as well as
several ablations of the different model and learning signal components. The architecture and training
setup of each ablation is identical to our base EATS model except in terms of the differences described
by the columns in Table 1. Each ablation is “subtractive”, representing the full EATS system minus
one particular feature. Our main result achieved by the base multi-speaker model is a mean opinion
score (MOS) of 4.083. Although it is difﬁcult to compare directly with prior results from the literature
due to dataset differences, we nonetheless include MOS results from prior works (Bi´nkowski et al.,
2020; van den Oord et al., 2016; 2018), with MOS in the 4.2 to 4.4+ range. Compared to these prior
models, which rely on aligned linguistic features, EATS uses substantially less supervision.
The No RWDs, No MelSpecD, and No Discriminators ablations all achieved substantially worse
MOS results than our proposed model, demonstrating the importance of adversarial feedback. In
particular, the No RWDs ablation, with an MOS of 2.526, demonstrates the importance of the raw
audio feedback, and removing RWDs signiﬁcantly degrades the high frequency components. No
MelSpecD causes intermittent artifacts and distortion, and removing all discriminators results in
audio that sounds robotic and distorted throughout. The No Llength and No Lpred ablations result in
a model that does not train at all. Comparing our model with No DTW (MOS 3.559), the temporal
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Model
Data
Inputs
RWD
MSD
Llength
Lpred
Align
MOS
Natural Speech
-
4.55 ± 0.075
GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020)
-
4.213 ± 0.046
WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016)
-
4.41 ± 0.069
Par. WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2018)
-
4.41 ± 0.078
Tacotron 2 (Shen et al., 2018)
-
4.526 ± 0.066
No Llength
MS
Ph
✓
✓
×
L′′
pred
MI
[does not train]
No Lpred
MS
Ph
✓
✓
✓
×
MI
[does not train]
No Discriminators
MS
Ph
×
×
✓
L′′
pred
MI
1.407 ± 0.040
No RWDs
MS
Ph
×
✓
✓
L′′
pred
MI
2.526 ± 0.060
No Phonemes
MS
Ch
✓
✓
✓
L′′
pred
MI
3.423 ± 0.073
No MelSpecD
MS
Ph
✓
×
✓
L′′
pred
MI
3.525 ± 0.057
No Mon. Int.
MS
Ph
✓
✓
✓
L′′
pred
Attn
3.551 ± 0.073
No DTW
MS
Ph
✓
✓
✓
Lpred
MI
3.559 ± 0.065
Single Speaker
SS
Ph
✓
✓
✓
L′′
pred
MI
3.829 ± 0.055
EATS (Ours)
MS
Ph
✓
✓
✓
L′′
pred
MI
4.083 ± 0.049
Table 1:
Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) for our ﬁnal EATS model and the ablations described in
Section 4, sorted by MOS. The middle columns indicate which components of our ﬁnal model
are enabled or ablated. Data describes the training set as Multispeaker (MS) or Single Speaker
(SS). Inputs describes the inputs as raw characters (Ch) or phonemes (Ph) produced by Phonemizer.
RWD (Random Window Discriminators), MSD (Mel-spectrogram Discriminator), and Llength (length
prediction loss) indicate the presence (✓) or absence (×) of each of these training components
described in Section 2. Lpred indicates which spectrogram prediction loss was used: with DTW
(L′′
pred, Eq. 6), without DTW (Lpred, Eq. 3), or absent (×). Align describes the architecture of the
aligner as monotonic interpolation (MI) or attention-based (Attn). We also compare against recent
state-of-the-art approaches from the literature which are trained on aligned linguistic features (unlike
our models). Our MOS evaluation set matches that of GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020) (and our
“Single Speaker” training subset matches the GAN-TTS training set); the other approaches are not
directly comparable due to dataset differences.
Speaker
#1
#2
#3
#4
Speaking Time (Hours)
51.68
31.21
20.68
10.32
MOS
4.083 ± 0.049
3.828 ± 0.051
4.149 ± 0.045
3.761 ± 0.052
Table 2: Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) for the top four speakers with the most data in our training set.
All evaluations are done using our single multi-speaker EATS model.
ﬂexibility provided by dynamic time warping signiﬁcantly improves ﬁdelity: removing it causes
warbling and unnatural phoneme lengths. No Phonemes is trained with raw character inputs and
attains MOS 3.423, due to occasional mispronunciations and unusual stress patterns. No Mon. Int.
uses an aligner with a transformer-based attention mechanism (described in Appendix G) in place
of our monotonic interpolation architecture, which turns out to generalise poorly to long utterances
(yielding MOS 3.551). Finally, comparing against training with only a Single Speaker (MOS 3.829)
shows that our EATS model beneﬁts from a much larger multi-speaker dataset, even though MOS
is evaluated only on this same single speaker on which the ablation was solely trained. Samples
from each ablation are available at https://deepmind.com/research/publications/
End-to-End-Adversarial-Text-to-Speech.
We demonstrate that the aligner learns to use the latent vector z to vary the predicted token lengths
in Appendix H. In Table 2 we present additional MOS results from our main multi-speaker EATS
model for the four most proliﬁc speakers in our training data3. MOS generally improves with more
training data, although the correlation is imperfect (e.g., Speaker #3 achieves the highest MOS with
only the third most training data).
3All of the MOS results in Table 1 are on samples from a single speaker, referred to as Speaker #1 in Table 2.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
5
DISCUSSION
We have presented an adversarial approach to text-to-speech synthesis which can learn from a
relatively weak supervisory signal – normalised text or phonemes paired with corresponding speech
audio. The speech generated by our proposed model matches the given conditioning texts and
generalises to unobserved texts, with naturalness judged by human raters approaching state-of-the-art
systems with multi-stage training pipelines or additional supervision. The proposed system described
in Section 2 is efﬁcient in both training and inference. In particular, it does not rely on autoregressive
sampling or teacher forcing, avoiding issues like exposure bias (Bengio et al., 2015; Ranzato et al.,
2016) and reduced parallelism at inference time, or the complexities introduced by distillation to a
more efﬁcient feed-forward model after the fact (van den Oord et al., 2018; Ping et al., 2019a).
While there remains a gap between the ﬁdelity of the speech produced by our method and the state-
of-the-art systems, we nonetheless believe that the end-to-end problem setup is a promising avenue
for future advancements and research in text-to-speech. End-to-end learning enables the system as a
whole to beneﬁt from large amounts of training data, freeing models to optimise their intermediate
representations for the task at hand, rather than constraining them to work with the typical bottlenecks
(e.g., mel-spectrograms, aligned linguistic features) imposed by most TTS pipelines today. We see
some evidence of this occurring in the comparison between our main result, trained using data from
69 speakers, against the Single Speaker ablation: the former is trained using roughly four times the
data and synthesises more natural speech in the single voice on which the latter is trained.
Notably, our current approach does not attempt to address the text normalisation and phonemisation
problems, relying on a separate, ﬁxed system for these aspects, while a fully end-to-end TTS system
could operate on unnormalised raw text. We believe that a fully data-driven approach could ultimately
prevail even in this setup given sufﬁcient training data and model capacity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Norman Casagrande, Yutian Chen, Aidan Clark, Kazuya Kawakami,
Pauline Luc, and many other colleagues at DeepMind for valuable discussions and input.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
REFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew
Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah,
Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent
Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg,
Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems. arXiv:1603.04467, 2015.
Sercan Ö Arik, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Gregory Diamos, Andrew Gibiansky, Yongguo
Kang, Xian Li, John Miller, Andrew Ng, Jonathan Raiman, Shubho Sengupta, and Mohammad
Shoeybi. Deep Voice: Real-time neural text-to-speech. In ICML, 2017.
Sercan Ö Arık, Heewoo Jun, and Gregory Diamos. Fast spectrogram inversion using multi-head
convolutional neural networks. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 2018.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv:1607.06450,
2016.
Eric Battenberg, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Soroosh Mariooryad, Daisy Stanton, David Kao, Matt Shannon,
and Tom Bagby. Location-relative attention mechanisms for robust long-form speech synthesis. In
ICASSP, 2020.
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled sampling for sequence
prediction with recurrent neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Mathieu Bernard. Phonemizer. https://github.com/bootphon/phonemizer, 2020.
Mikołaj Bi´nkowski, Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Aidan Clark, Erich Elsen, Norman Casagrande,
Luis C. Cobo, and Karen Simonyan. High ﬁdelity speech synthesis with adversarial networks. In
ICLR, 2020.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high ﬁdelity
natural image synthesis. In ICLR, 2018.
Peter Buchlovsky, David Budden, Dominik Grewe, Chris Jones, John Aslanides, Frederic Besse,
Andy Brock, Aidan Clark, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Aedan Pope, Fabio Viola, and Dan Belov.
TF-Replicator: Distributed machine learning for researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00465,
2019.
Jonathan Chevelu, Damien Lolive, Sébastien Le Maguer, and David Guennec. How to compare
TTS systems: A new subjective evaluation methodology focused on differences. In International
Speech Communication Association, 2015.
Chung-Cheng Chiu and Colin Raffel. Monotonic chunkwise attention. In ICLR, 2018.
Marco Cuturi and Mathieu Blondel. Soft-DTW: a differentiable loss function for time-series. In
ICML, 2017.
Harm De Vries, Florian Strub, Jérémie Mary, Hugo Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin, and Aaron C
Courville. Modulating early visual processing by language. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Alexandre Défossez, Neil Zeghidour, Nicolas Usunier, Léon Bottou, and Francis Bach. SING:
Symbol-to-instrument neural generator. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. Adversarial audio synthesis. In ICLR, 2019.
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. A learned representation for artistic
style. In ICLR, 2017.
Jesse Engel, Lamtharn (Hanoi) Hantrakul, Chenjie Gu, and Adam Roberts. DDSP: Differentiable
digital signal processing. In ICLR, 2020.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan Arik, Gregory Diamos, John Miller, Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, Jonathan
Raiman, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep Voice 2: Multi-speaker neural text-to-speech. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NeurIPS, 2014.
Alex Graves. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks. arXiv:1211.3711, 2012.
Alex Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.
Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, Faustino Gomez, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Connectionist temporal
classiﬁcation: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In ICML,
2006.
Daniel Grifﬁn and Jae Lim. Signal estimation from modiﬁed short-time Fourier transform. IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1984.
Haohan Guo, Frank K Soong, Lei He, and Lei Xie. A new GAN-based end-to-end TTS training
algorithm. In Interspeech, 2019.
Mutian He, Yan Deng, and Lei He. Robust sequence-to-sequence acoustic modeling with stepwise
monotonic attention for neural TTS. In Interspeech, 2019.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NeurIPS,
2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
NeurIPS Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. In ICML, 2015.
Fumitada Itakura. Minimum prediction residual principle applied to speech recognition. IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1975.
Nal Kalchbrenner, Erich Elsen, Karen Simonyan, Seb Noury, Norman Casagrande, Edward Lockhart,
Florian Stimberg, Aäron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Efﬁcient
neural audio synthesis. In ICML, 2018.
Jaehyeon Kim, Sungwon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Sungroh Yoon. Glow-TTS: A generative ﬂow for
text-to-speech via monotonic alignment search. arXiv:2005.11129, 2020.
Sungwon Kim, Sang-Gil Lee, Jongyoon Song, Jaehyeon Kim, and Sungroh Yoon. FloWaveNet: A
generative ﬂow for raw audio. In ICML, 2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Kundan Kumar, Rithesh Kumar, Thibault de Boissiere, Lucas Gestin, Wei Zhen Teoh, Jose Sotelo,
Alexandre de Brebisson, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. MelGAN: Generative adversarial
networks for conditional waveform synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Karol Kurach, Mario Luˇci´c, Xiaohua Zhai, Marcin Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly. A large-scale study
on regularization and normalization in GANs. In ICML, 2019.
Naihan Li, Shujie Liu, Yanqing Liu, Sheng Zhao, and Ming Liu. Neural speech synthesis with
transformer network. In AAAI, 2019.
Jae Hyun Lim and Jong Chul Ye. Geometric GAN. arXiv:1705.02894, 2017.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In ICLR,
2017.
Soroush Mehri, Kundan Kumar, Ishaan Gulrajani, Rithesh Kumar, Shubham Jain, Jose Sotelo, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. SampleRNN: An unconditional end-to-end neural audio generation
model. In ICLR, 2017.
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Chenfeng Miao, Shuang Liang, Minchuan Chen, Jun Ma, Shaojun Wang, and Jing Xiao. Flow-TTS:
A non-autoregressive network for text to speech based on ﬂow. In ICASSP, 2020.
Takeru Miyato and Masanori Koyama. cGANs with projection discriminator. In ICLR, 2018.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization for
generative adversarial networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Masanori Morise, Fumiya Yokomori, and Kenji Ozawa. WORLD: A vocoder-based high-quality
speech synthesis system for real-time applications. IEICE Transactions on Information and
Systems, 2016.
Paarth Neekhara, Chris Donahue, Miller Puckette, Shlomo Dubnov, and Julian McAuley. Expediting
TTS synthesis with adversarial vocoding. In Interspeech, 2019.
George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji
Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing ﬂows for probabilistic modeling and inference. arXiv:1912.02762,
2019.
Kainan Peng, Wei Ping, Zhao Song, and Kexin Zhao.
Parallel neural text-to-speech.
arXiv:1905.08459, 2019.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O. Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang, Jonathan
Raiman, and John Miller. Deep Voice 3: 2000-speaker neural text-to-speech. In ICLR, 2018.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, and Jitong Chen. ClariNet: Parallel wave generation in end-to-end text-to-
speech. In ICLR, 2019a.
Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Kexin Zhao, and Zhao Song. WaveFlow: A compact ﬂow-based model for
raw audio. arXiv:1912.01219, 2019b.
Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro. WaveGlow: A ﬂow-based generative network for
speech synthesis. In ICASSP, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Minh-Thang Luong, Peter J Liu, Ron J Weiss, and Douglas Eck. Online and linear-time
attention by enforcing monotonic alignments. In ICML, 2017.
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence level training
with recurrent neural networks. In ICLR, 2016.
Yi Ren, Yangjun Ruan, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. FastSpeech:
Fast, robust and controllable text to speech. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Malcolm Reynolds, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Frederic Besse, Diego de Las Casas, Andreas Fidjeland,
Tim Green, Adrià Puigdomènech, Sébastien Racanière, Jack Rae, and Fabio Viola. Open sourcing
Sonnet - a new library for constructing neural networks. https://deepmind.com/blog/
open-sourcing-sonnet/, 2017.
Hardik B Sailor and Hemant A Patil. Fusion of magnitude and phase-based features for objective
evaluation of TTS voice. In International Symposium on Chinese Spoken Language Processing,
2014.
Hiroaki Sakoe. Dynamic-programming approach to continuous speech recognition. In International
Congress of Acoustics, 1971.
Hiroaki Sakoe and Seibi Chiba. Dynamic programming algorithm optimization for spoken word
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1978.
Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng
Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerrv-Ryan, Rif A. Saurous, Yannis Agiomyrgiannakis, and
Yonghui Wu. Natural TTS synthesis by conditioning WaveNet on Mel spectrogram predictions. In
ICASSP, 2018.
Jose Sotelo, Soroush Mehri, Kundan Kumar, Joao Felipe Santos, Kyle Kastner, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Char2Wav: End-to-end speech synthesis. In ICLR, 2017.
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Yaniv Taigman, Lior Wolf, Adam Polyak, and Eliya Nachmani. VoiceLoop: Voice ﬁtting and
synthesis via a phonological loop. arXiv:1705.03122, 2017.
Paul Taylor. Text-to-speech synthesis. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, and David M. Blei. Hierarchical implicit models and likelihood-free
variational inference. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Jean-Marc Valin and Jan Skoglund. LPCNet: Improving neural speech synthesis through linear
prediction. In ICASSP, 2019.
Rafael Valle, Kevin Shih, Ryan Prenger, and Bryan Catanzaro. Flowtron: an autoregressive ﬂow-based
generative network for text-to-speech synthesis. arXiv:2005.05957, 2020.
Aäron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew W. Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. WaveNet: A generative model for
raw audio. arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
George Driessche, Edward Lockhart, Luis Cobo, Florian Stimberg, Norman Casagrande, Dominik
Grewe, Seb Noury, Sander Dieleman, Erich Elsen, Nal Kalchbrenner, Heiga Zen, Alex Graves,
Helen King, Tom Walters, Dan Belov, and Demis Hassabis. Parallel WaveNet: Fast high-ﬁdelity
speech synthesis. In ICML, 2018.
Sean Vasquez and Mike Lewis. MelNet: A generative model for audio in the frequency domain.
arXiv:1906.01083, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Xin Wang, Shinji Takaki, and Junichi Yamagishi. Neural source-ﬁlter-based waveform model for
statistical parametric speech synthesis. In ICASSP, 2019.
Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron J Weiss, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng
Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, Quoc Le, Yannis Agiomyrgiannakis, Rob Clark,
and Rif A. Saurous. Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis. In Interspeech, 2017.
Ronald J. Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
neural networks. Neural Computation, 1989.
Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. Probability density distillation with generative
adversarial networks for high-quality parallel waveform generation. In Interspeech, 2019.
Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. Parallel WaveGAN: A fast waveform gen-
eration model based on generative adversarial networks with multi-resolution spectrogram. In
ICASSP, 2020.
Geng Yang, Shan Yang, Kai Liu, Peng Fang, Wei Chen, and Lei Xie. Multi-band MelGAN: Faster
waveform generation for high-quality text-to-speech. arXiv:2005.05106, 2020.
Heiga Zen, Keiichi Tokuda, and Alan W Black. Statistical parametric speech synthesis. Speech
Communication, 2009.
Hao Zhang, Richard Sproat, Axel H Ng, Felix Stahlberg, Xiaochang Peng, Kyle Gorman, and Brian
Roark. Neural models of text normalization for speech applications. Computational Linguistics,
2019.
Jing-Xuan Zhang, Zhen-Hua Ling, and Li-Rong Dai. Forward attention in sequence-to-sequence
acoustic modeling for speech synthesis. In ICASSP, 2018.
13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
# Utt. /
# Batch /
# Utt. /
Length /
Length /
Med. Run
Realtime
Hardware
Batch
Run
Run
Utt. (s)
Run (s)
Time (s)
Factor
TPU v3 (1 chip)
16
10
160
30
4800
30.53
157.2×
V100 GPU (1)
8
10
80
30
2400
11.60
206.8×
Xeon CPU (6 cores)
2
10
20
30
600
70.42
8.520×
Table 3: EATS batched inference benchmarks, timing inference (speech generation) on a Google
Cloud TPU v3 (1 chip with 2 cores), a single NVIDIA V100 GPU, or an Intel Xeon E5-1650 v4
CPU at 3.60 GHz (6 physical cores). We use a batch size of 2, 8, or 16 utterances (Utt.), each 30
seconds long (input length of 600 phoneme tokens, padded if necessary). One “run” consists of 10
consecutive forward passes at the given batch size. We perform 101 such runs and report the median
run time (Med. Run Time (s)) and the resulting Realtime Factor, the ratio of the total duration of the
generated speech (Length / Run (s)) to the run time. (Note: GPU benchmarking is done using single
precision (IEEE FP32) ﬂoating point; switching to half precision (IEEE FP16) could yield further
speedups.)
A
HYPERPARAMETERS AND OTHER DETAILS
Our models are trained for 5 · 105 steps, where a single step consists of one discriminator update
followed by one generator update, each using a minibatch size of 1024, with batches sampled indepen-
dently in each of these two updates. Both updates are computed using the Adam optimizer (Kingma &
Ba, 2015) with β1 = 0 and β2 = 0.999, and a learning rate of 10−3 with a cosine decay (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2017) schedule used such that the learning rate is 0 at step 500K. We apply spectral
normalisation (Miyato et al., 2018) to the weights of the generator’s decoder module and to the
discriminators (but not to the generator’s aligner module). Parameters are initialised orthogonally
and off-diagonal orthogonal regularisation with weight 10−4 is applied to the generator, following
BigGAN (Brock et al., 2018). Minibatches are split over 64 or 128 cores (32 or 64 chips) of Google
Cloud TPU v3 Pods, which allows training of a single model within up to 58 hours. We use cross-
replica BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) to compute batch statistics aggregated across all devices.
Like in GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020), our trained generator requires computation of standing
statistics before sampling; i.e., accumulating batch norm statistics from 200 forward passes. As in
GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020) and BigGAN (Brock et al., 2018), we use an exponential moving
average of the generator weights for inference, with a decay of 0.9999. Although GANs are known
to exhibit stability issues sometimes, we found that EATS model training consistently converges.
Models were implemented using TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) v1 framework and the Son-
net (Reynolds et al., 2017) neural network library. We used the TF-Replicator (Buchlovsky et al.,
2019) library for data parallel training over TPUs.
Inference speed.
In Table 3 we report benchmarks for EATS batched inference on two modern
hardware platforms (Google Cloud TPU v3, NVIDIA V100 GPU, Intel Xeon E5-1650 CPU). We
ﬁnd that EATS can generate speech two orders of magnitude faster than realtime on a GPU or TPU,
demonstrating the efﬁciency of our feed-forward model. On the GPU, generating 2400 seconds (40
minutes) of speech (80 utterances of 30 seconds each) takes 11.60 seconds on average (median), for a
realtime factor of 206.8×. On TPU we observe a realtime factor of 157.2× per chip (2 cores), or
78.6× per core. On a CPU, inference runs at 8.52× realtime.
14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
B
ALIGNER PSEUDOCODE
In Figure 3 we present pseudocode for the EATS aligner described in Section 2.1.
C
SPECTROGRAM DISCRIMINATOR ARCHITECTURE
In this Appendix we present details of the architecture of the spectrogram discriminator (Section 2.3).
The discriminator’s inputs are 47 × 80 × 1 images, produced by adding a channel dimension to
the 47 × 80 output of the mel-spectrogram computation (Appendix D) from the length 48000 input
waveforms (2 seconds of audio at 24 kHz).
Then, the architecture is like that of the BigGAN-deep (Brock et al., 2018) discriminator for 128×128
images (listed in BigGAN (Brock et al., 2018) Appendix B, Table 7 (b)), but removing the ﬁrst two
“ResBlocks” and the “Non-Local Block” (self-attention) – rows 2-4 in the architecture table (keeping
row 1, the input convolution, and rows 5+ afterwards, as is). This removes one 2 × 2 downsampling
step as the resolution of the spectrogram inputs is smaller than the 128 × 128 images for which the
BigGAN-deep architecture was designed. We set the channel width multiplier referenced in the table
to ch = 64.
15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
def EATSAligner(token_sequences, token_vocab_size, lengths, speaker_ids,
num_speakers, noise, out_offset, out_sequence_length=6000,
sigma2=10.):
"""Returns audio-aligned features and lengths for the given input sequences.
"N" denotes the batch size throughout the comments.
Args:
token_sequences: batch of token sequences indicating the ID of each token,
padded to a fixed maximum sequence length (400 for training, 600 for
sampling). Tokens may either correspond to raw characters or phonemes (as
output by Phonemizer). Each sequence should begin and end with a special
silence token (assumed to have already been added to the inputs).
(dtype=int, shape=[N, in_sequence_length=600])
token_vocab_size: scalar int indicating the number of tokens.
(All values in token_sequences should be in [0, token_vocab_size).)
lengths: indicates the true length <= in_sequence_length=600 of each
sequence in token_sequences before padding was added.
(dtype=int, shape=[N])
speaker_ids: ints indicating the speaker ID.
(dtype=int, shape=[N])
num_speakers: scalar int indicating the number of speakers.
(All values in speaker_ids should be in [0, num_speakers).)
noise: 128D noise sampled from a standard isotropic Gaussian (N(0,1)).
(dtype=float, shape=[N, 128])
out_offset: first timestep to output. Randomly sampled for training, 0 for
sampling.
(dtype=int, shape=[N])
out_sequence_length: scalar int length of the output sequence at 200 Hz.
400 for training (2 seconds), 6000 for sampling (30 seconds).
sigma2: scalar float temperature (sigma**2) for the softmax.
Returns:
aligned_features: audio-aligned features to be fed into the decoder.
(dtype=float, shape=[N, out_sequence_length, 256])
aligned_lengths: the predicted audio-aligned lengths.
(dtype=float, shape=[N])
"""
# Learn embeddings of the input tokens and speaker IDs.
embedded_tokens = Embed(input_vocab_size=token_vocab_size,
# -> [N, 600, 256]
output_dim=256)(token_sequences)
embedded_speaker_ids = Embed(input_vocab_size=num_speakers,
# -> [N, 128]
output_dim=128)(speaker_ids)
# Make the "class-conditioning" inputs for class-conditional batch norm (CCBN)
# using the embedded speaker IDs and the noise.
ccbn_condition = Concat([embedded_speaker_ids, noise], axis=1)
# -> [N, 256]
# Add a dummy sequence axis to ccbn_condition for broadcasting.
ccbn_condition = ccbn_condition[:, None, :]
# -> [N, 1, 256]
# Use `lengths` to make a mask indicating valid entries of token_sequences.
sequence_length = token_sequences.shape[1]
# = 600
mask = Range(sequence_length)[None, :] < lengths[:, None]
# -> [N, 600]
# Dilated 1D convolution stack.
# 10 blocks * 6 convs per block = 60 convolutions total.
x = embedded_tokens
conv_mask = mask[:, :, None]
# -> [N, 600, 1]; dummy axis for broadcast.
for _ in range(10):
for a, b in [(1, 2), (4, 8), (16, 32)]:
block_inputs = x
x = ReLU(ClassConditionalBatchNorm(x, ccbn_condition))
x = MaskedConv1D(output_channels=256, kernel_size=3, dilation=a)(
x, conv_mask)
x = ReLU(ClassConditionalBatchNorm(x, ccbn_condition))
x = MaskedConv1D(output_channels=256, kernel_size=3, dilation=b)(
x, conv_mask)
x += block_inputs
# -> [N, 600, 256]
# Save dilated conv stack outputs as unaligned_features.
unaligned_features = x
# [N, 600, 256]
# Map to predicted token lengths.
x = ReLU(ClassConditionalBatchNorm(x, ccbn_condition))
x = Conv1D(output_channels=256, kernel_size=1)(x)
x = ReLU(ClassConditionalBatchNorm(x, ccbn_condition))
x = Conv1D(output_channels=1, kernel_size=1)(x)
# -> [N, 600, 1]
token_lengths = ReLU(x[:, :, 0])
# -> [N, 600]
token_ends = CumSum(token_lengths, axis=1)
# -> [N, 600]
token_centres = token_ends - (token_lengths / 2.)
# -> [N, 600]
# Compute predicted length as the last valid entry of token_ends.
-> [N]
aligned_lengths = [end[length-1] for end, length in zip(token_ends, lengths)]
# Compute output grid -> [N, out_sequence_length=6000]
out_pos = Range(out_sequence_length)[None, :] + out_offset[:, None]
out_pos = Cast(out_pos[:, :, None], float)
# -> [N, 6000, 1]
diff = token_centres[:, None, :] - out_pos
# -> [N, 6000, 600]
logits = -(diff**2 / sigma2)
# -> [N, 6000, 600]
# Mask out invalid input locations (flip 0/1 to 1/0); add dummy output axis.
logits_inv_mask = 1. - Cast(mask[:, None, :], float)
# -> [N, 1, 600]
masked_logits = logits - 1e9 * logits_inv_mask
# -> [N, 6000, 600]
weights = Softmax(masked_logits, axis=2)
# -> [N, 6000, 600]
# Do a batch matmul (written as an einsum) to compute the aligned features.
# aligned_features -> [N, 6000, 256]
aligned_features = Einsum('noi,nid->nod', weights, unaligned_features)
return aligned_features, aligned_lengths
Figure 3: Pseudocode for our proposed EATS aligner.
16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
import tensorflow.compat.v1 as tf
def get_mel_spectrogram(waveforms, invert_mu_law=True, mu=255.,
jitter=False, max_jitter_steps=60):
"""Computes mel-spectrograms for the given waveforms.
Args:
waveforms: a tf.Tensor corresponding to a batch of waveforms
sampled at 24 kHz.
(dtype=tf.float32, shape=[N, sequence_length])
invert_mu_law: whether to apply mu-law inversion to the input waveforms.
In EATS both the real data and generator outputs are mu-law'ed, so this is
always set to True.
mu: The mu value used if invert_mu_law=True (ignored otherwise).
jitter: whether to apply random jitter to the input waveforms before
computing spectrograms. Set to True only for GT spectrograms input to the
prediction loss.
max_jitter_steps: maximum number of steps by which the input waveforms are
randomly jittered if jitter=True (ignored otherwise).
Returns:
A 3D tensor with spectrograms for the corresponding input waveforms.
(dtype=tf.float32,
shape=[N, num_frames=ceil(sequence_length/1024), num_bins=80])
"""
waveforms.shape.assert_has_rank(2)
t = waveforms
if jitter:
assert max_jitter_steps >= 0
crop_shape = [t.shape[1]]
t = tf.pad(t, [[0, 0], [max_jitter_steps, max_jitter_steps]])
# Jitter independently for each batch item.
t = tf.map_fn(lambda ti: tf.image.random_crop(ti, crop_shape), t)
if invert_mu_law:
t = tf.sign(t) / mu * ((1 + mu)**tf.abs(t) - 1)
t = tf.signal.stft(t, frame_length=2048, frame_step=1024, pad_end=True)
t = tf.abs(t)
mel_weight_matrix = tf.signal.linear_to_mel_weight_matrix(
num_mel_bins=80, num_spectrogram_bins=t.shape[-1],
sample_rate=24000., lower_edge_hertz=80., upper_edge_hertz=7600.)
t = tf.tensordot(t, mel_weight_matrix, axes=1)
t = tf.log(1. + 10000.*t)
return t
gen_spectrograms_for_pred_loss = get_mel_spectrogram(gen_waveforms,
jitter=False)
real_spectrograms_for_pred_loss = get_mel_spectrogram(real_waveforms,
jitter=True)
Figure 4: TensorFlow code for mel-spectrogram computation.
D
MEL-SPECTROGRAM COMPUTATION
In Figure 4 we include the TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2015) code used to compute the mel-spectrograms
fed into the spectrogram discriminator (Section 2.3) and the spectrogram prediction loss (Section 2.4).
Note that for use in the prediction losses Lpred or L′′
pred, we call this function with jitter=True
for real spectrograms and jitter=False for generated spectrograms. When used for the spec-
trogram discriminator inputs, we do not apply jitter to either real or generated spectrograms, setting
jitter=False in both cases.
17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
def soft_minimum(values, temperature):
"""Compute the soft minimum with the given temperature."""
return -temperature * log(sum(exp(-values / temperature)))
def skew_matrix(x):
"""Skew a matrix so that the diagonals become the rows."""
height, width = x.shape
y = zeros(height + width - 1, width)
for i in range(height + width - 1):
for j in range(width):
# Shift each column j down by j steps.
y[i, j] = x[clip(i - j, 0, height - 1), j]
return y
def spectrogram_dtw_error(spec_a, spec_b, warp_penalty=1.0, temperature=0.01):
"""Compute DTW error given a pair of spectrograms."""
# Compute cost matrix.
diffs = abs(spec_a[None, :, :] - spec_b[:, None, :])
costs = mean(diffs, axis=-1)
# pairwise L1 cost, square the diffs for L2.
size = cost.shape[-1]
# Initialise path costs.
path_cost = INFINITY * ones(size + 1)
path_cost_prev = INFINITY * ones(size + 1)
path_cost_prev[0] = 0.0
# Aggregate path costs from cost[0, 0] to cost[-1, -1].
cost = skew_matrix(cost)
# Shape is now (2 * size - 1, size).
for i in range(2 * size - 1):
directions = [path_cost_prev[:-1],
path_cost[1:] + warp_penalty,
path_cost[:-1] + warp_penalty]
path_cost_next = cost[i] + soft_minimum(directions, temperature)
# Replace soft minimum with regular minimum for regular DTW.
path_cost_next = concatenate([[INFINITY], path_cost_next])
path_cost, path_cost_prev = path_cost_next, path_cost
return path_cost[-1]
Figure 5: Pseudocode for dynamic time warping.
E
DYNAMIC TIME WARPING PSEUDOCODE
In Figure 5 we present pseudocode for the soft dynamic time warping (DTW) procedure we use in
the spectrogram prediction loss L′′
pred.
Note that the complexity of this implementation is quadratic. It could be made more efﬁcient using
Itakura or Sakoe-Chiba bands (Itakura, 1975; Sakoe & Chiba, 1978), but we found that enabling or
disabling DTW for the prediction loss did not meaningfully affect training time, so this optimisation
is not necessary in practice.
18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Output symbol
x
ç
ì
j
;
—
¡
r
~
"
Substitute symbol
k
k
l
j
.
.
Table 4: The symbols in this table are replaced or removed when they appear in phonemizer’s output.
F
TEXT PREPROCESSING
We use phonemizer (Bernard, 2020) (version 2.2) to perform partial normalisation and phone-
misation of the input text (for all our results except for the No Phonemes ablation, where we use
character sequences as input directly). We used the espeak backend (with espeak-ng version
1.50), which produces phoneme sequences using the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). We
enabled the following options that phonemizer provides:
• with_stress, which includes primary and secondary stress marks in the output;
• strip, which removes spurious whitespace;
• preserve_punctuation, which ensures that punctuation is left unchanged. This is important
because punctuation can meaningfully affect prosody.
The phoneme sequences produced by phonemizer contain some rare symbols (usually in non-English
words), which we replace with more frequent symbols. The substitutions we perform are listed in
Table 4. This results in a set of 51 distinct symbols. The character sequence
Modern text-to-speech synthesis pipelines typically involve multiple processing
stages.
becomes
m"A:dÄn
t"Ekstt@sp"i:tS
s"InT@s­Is
p"aIplaInz
t"IpIkli
Inv"A:lv
m­2ltIp@l
pô"A:sEsIN st"eIdZ1z.
G
TRANSFORMER-BASED ATTENTION ALIGNER BASELINE
In this Appendix we describe our transformer-based attention aligner baseline, used in Section 4
to compare against our monotonic interpolation-based aligner described in Section 2.1. We use
transformer attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) with output positional features as the queries, and a sum
of input positional features and encoder output as the keys. The encoder outputs are from the same
dilated convolution stack as used in our EATS model, normalised using Layer Normalization (Ba
et al., 2016) before input into the transformer. We omit the fully-connected output layer following the
attention mechanism. Both sets of positional features use the sinusoidal encodings from Vaswani
et al. (2017). We use 4 heads with key and value dimensions of 64 per head. Its outputs are taken
as the audio-aligned feature representations, after which we apply Batch Normalisation and ReLU
non-linearity before upsampling via the decoder.
19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
0
5
10
Time (s)
0
28
56
84
112
140
168
196
224
252
280
Token index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
12.75
13.00
13.25
13.50
13.75
Time (s)
265
267
269
271
273
275
277
279
281
283
Figure 6: Positions of the tokens over time for 128 utterances generated from the same text, with
different latent vectors z. Close-ups of the start and end of the sequence show the variability of the
predicted lengths.
13.65
13.70
13.75
13.80
13.85
Length (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Count
Figure 7: Histogram of lengths for 128 utterances generated from the same text, with different latent
vectors z.
H
VARIATION IN ALIGNMENT
To demonstrate that the aligner module makes use of the latent vector z to account for variations
in token lengths, we generated 128 different renditions of the second sentence from the abstract:
“In this work, we take on the challenging task of learning to synthesise speech from normalised text
or phonemes in an end-to-end manner, resulting in models which operate directly on character or
phoneme input sequences and produce raw speech audio outputs.”. Figure 6 shows the positions of
the tokens over time, with close-ups of the start and end of the sequence, to make the subtle variations
in length more visible. Figure 7 shows a histogram of the lengths of the generated utterances. The
variation is subtle (less than 2% for this utterance), but noticeable. Given that the training data
consists of high-quality recordings of human speech performed by professional voice actors, only a
modest degree of variation is to be expected.
20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Model
MOS
FDSD
Natural Speech
4.55 ± 0.075
0.682
No Discriminators
1.407 ± 0.040
1.594
No RWDs
2.526 ± 0.060
0.757
No Phonemes
3.423 ± 0.073
0.688
No MelSpecD
3.525 ± 0.057
0.849
No Mon. Int.
3.551 ± 0.073
0.724
No DTW
3.559 ± 0.065
0.694
EATS
4.083 ± 0.049
0.702
Table 5: Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) and Fréchet DeepSpeech Distances (FDSD) for our ﬁnal
EATS model and the ablations described in Section 4, sorted by MOS. FDSD scores presented here
were computed on held-out validation multi-speaker set and therefore could not be obtained for the
Single Speaker ablation. Due to dataset differences, these are also not comparable with the FDSD
values reported for GAN-TTS by Bi´nkowski et al. (2020).
I
EVALUATION WITH FRÉCHET DEEPSPEECH DISTANCE
We found Fréchet DeepSpeech Distances (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020), both conditional and unconditional,
unreliable in our setting. Although they provided useful guidance at the early stages of model iteration
– i.e., were able to clearly distinguish the models that do and do not train – FDSD scores of the models
of reasonable quality were not in line with their Mean Opinion Scores, as shown for our ablations in
Table 5.
A possible reason for FDSD working less well in our setting is the fact that our models rely on
features extracted from spectrograms similar to those computed at the DeepSpeech preprocessing
stage. As our models combine losses computed on raw audio and mel-spectrograms, it might be the
case that the speech generated by some model is of lower quality, yet has convincing spectrograms.
Comparison of two of our ablations seems to afﬁrm this hypothesis: the No MelSpecD model
achieves much higher MOS (≈3.5) than the No RWDs ablation (≈2.5) which is optimised only
against spectrogram-based losses. Their FDSDs, however, suggest the opposite ranking of these
models.
Another potential cause for the discrepancy between MOS and FDSD is the difference in samples
for which these scores were established. While FDSD was computed on samples randomly held out
from the training set, the MOS was computed on more challenging, often longer utterances. As we
did not have ground truth audio for the latter, we could not compute FDSD for these samples. The
sample sizes commonly used for the metrics based on Fréchet distance, e.g. (Heusel et al., 2017;
Kurach et al., 2019; Bi´nkowski et al., 2020), are also usually larger than the ones used for MOS
testing (van den Oord et al., 2016; Bi´nkowski et al., 2020); we used 5,120 samples for FDSD and
1,000 for MOS.
We also note that conditional FDSD is not immediately applicable in our setting, as it requires ﬁxed
length (two second) samples with aligned conditionings, while in our case there is no ﬁxed alignment
between the ground truth characters and audio.
We hope that future research will revisit the challenge of automatic quantitative evaluation of text-to-
speech models and produce a reliable quality metric for models operating in our current regime.
21

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Stages
1 Stage
Notes
WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016)
Ling
AR
−−→Au
×
SampleRNN (Mehri et al., 2017)
∅
AR
−−→Au
×
not a TTS model
Deep Voice (Arik et al., 2017)
Ch
AR
−−→Ph
FF
−→Ling
AR
−−→Au
×
uses segmentation model
WaveRNN (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018)
Ling
AR
−−→Au
×
LPCNet (Valin & Skoglund, 2019)
Cep
AR
−−→Au
×
WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019)
MelS
FF
−→Au
×
FloWaveNet (Kim et al., 2019)
MelS
FF
−→Au
×
WaveFlow (Ping et al., 2019b)
MelS
AR
−−→Au
×
partially autoregressive
Par. WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2018)
Ling
FF*
−−→Au
×
distillation
ClariNet (Ping et al., 2019a), teacher
Ch/Ph
AR
−−→Au
✓
ClariNet (Ping et al., 2019a), student
Ch/Ph
FF*
−−→Au
×
distillation
WaveGAN (Donahue et al., 2019)
∅
FF
−→Au
×
not a TTS model
MelGAN (Kumar et al., 2019)
MelS
FF
−→Au
×
Par. WaveGAN (Yamamoto et al., 2020)
Ph
AR
−−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
AdVoc (Neekhara et al., 2019)
MelS
FF
−→MagS
×
GAN-TTS (Bi´nkowski et al., 2020)
Ling
FF
−→Au
×
Tacotron (Wang et al., 2017)
Ch
AR
−−→MelS
FF
−→MagS −
→Au
×
uses Grifﬁn & Lim (1984)
Tacotron 2 (Shen et al., 2018)
Ch
AR
−−→MelS
AR
−−→Au
×
Deep Voice 2 (Gibiansky et al., 2017)
Ch −
→Ph
FF
−→Ling
AR
−−→Au
×
uses segmentation model
DV2 Tacotron (Gibiansky et al., 2017)
Ch
AR
−−→MagS
AR
−−→Au
×
Deep Voice 3 (Ping et al., 2018)
Ch
AR
−−→MelS
AR
−−→Au
×
several alternative vocoders
TransformerTTS (Li et al., 2019)
Ch −
→Ph
AR
−−→MelS
AR
−−→Au
×
Flowtron (Valle et al., 2020)
Ch
AR
−−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
VoiceLoop (Taigman et al., 2017)
Ph
AR
−−→Ling −
→Au
×
GAN Exposure (Guo et al., 2019)
Ph
AR
−−→MelS
AR
−−→Au
×
MelNet (Vasquez & Lewis, 2019)
Ch
AR
−−→MelS −
→Au
×
ParaNet (Peng et al., 2019)
Ch/Ph
FF*
−−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
distillation
FastSpeech (Ren et al., 2019)
Ph
FF*
−−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
distillation
Flow-TTS (Miao et al., 2020)
Ch
FF
−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
Glow-TTS (Kim et al., 2020)
Ph
FF
−→MelS
FF
−→Au
×
Char2wav (Sotelo et al., 2017)
Ch
AR
−−→Ling
AR
−−→Au
×
end-to-end ﬁnetuning
EATS (Ours)
Ch/Ph
FF
−→Au
✓
Table 6:
A comparison of TTS methods. The model stages described in each paper are shown
by linking together the inputs, outputs and intermediate representations that are used: characters
(Ch), phonemes (Ph), mel-spectrograms (MelS), magnitude spectrograms (MagS), cepstral fea-
tures (Cep), linguistic features (Ling, such as phoneme durations and fundamental frequencies, or
WORLD (Morise et al., 2016) features for Char2wav (Sotelo et al., 2017) and VoiceLoop (Taigman
et al., 2017)), and audio (Au). Arrows with various superscripts describe model components: autore-
gressive (AR), feed-forward (FF), or feed-forward requiring distillation (FF*). Arrows without a
superscript indicate components that do not require learning. 1 Stage means the model is trained in
a single stage to map from unaligned text/phonemes to audio (without, e.g., distillation or separate
vocoder training). EATS is the only feed-forward model that fulﬁlls this requirement.
22

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
J
COMPARISON OF TTS METHODS
In Table 6 we compare recent TTS approaches in terms of the inputs and outputs to each stage of
the pipeline, and whether they are learnt in a single stage or multiple stages. Differentiating EATS
from each prior approach is the fact that it learns a feed-forward mapping from text/phonemes to
audio end-to-end in a single stage, without requiring distillation or separate vocoder training. The
ClariNet teacher model (Ping et al., 2019a) is also trained in a single stage, but it uses teacher forcing
to achieve this, requiring the model to be autoregressive. A separate distillation stage is necessary to
obtain a feed-forward model in this case.
23

